Actions & alerting getting started user guides (#39093)
elastic/kibana: x-pack/plugins/alerting/README.md

|services.log(tags, [data], [timestamp])|Use this to create server logs. (This is the same function as server.log)|
|scheduledRunAt|The date and time the alert type execution was scheduled to be called.|
|previousScheduledRunAt|The previous date and time the alert type was scheduled to be called.|
|params|Parameters for the execution. This is where the parameters you require will be passed in. (example threshold). Use alert type validation to ensure values are set before execution.|
|state|State returned from previous execution. This is the alert level state, what is returned by the executor will be serialized and provided here at the next execution.|

### Example

```
server.plugins.alerting.registerType({
  id: 'my-alert-type',
  name: 'My alert type',
  validate: {
    params: Joi.object()
      .keys({
        myParam: Joi.string().required(),
      })
      .required(),
  },
  async execute({
    scheduledRunAt,
    previousScheduledRunAt,
    services,
    params,
    state,
  }: AlertExecuteOptions) {  
    // Use this example to fire a single action

>     alertInstanceFactory('server_1')

Reviewer: should be `services. alertInstanceFactory`

>     alertInstanceFactory('server_1')

Reviewer: Also, I'm not clear on what the string you pass to alert instance factory does.  This needs to be explained I think.

      .replaceState({
        // Alert instance level state, use getState() for
        // previous and persisted values
        ...
      })

>       .fire('default', {

Reviewer: It's not immediately clear what the `default` string does here.  Reading below I might be able to connect the dots and realize that this is the action group.  Also, what if I want to fire multiple action groups?  Seems like this wouldn't be supported with the current code.

Author: I will make a change to the docs, in regards to fire multiple action groups, by design, you would have to duplicate the action for each group you would like it to fire for. Ex if you want email on `warning` and `severe` action groups, you would have to pass two objects to `actions` on the create alert API. In the future we could make `group` an array within the `actions` array passed into the create alert API.

Reviewer 2: Seems fairly painful to have to recreate actions. I can easily imagine a scenario where I want a less important alert firing slack messages, but if the alert severity grows into a more important scenario, send an email (contrived example).  But I'd still want the slack messages fired.

Don't have any thoughts on making it easier tho, ATM.  Have thoughts on making it harder, so I'll keep those to myself for now :-)

        server: 'server_1',
      });
    
    // Use this example to fire multiple actions
    // This scenario allows a single query and "fan-off" zero, one or many alerts based on the results
    for (const server of ['server_1', 'server_2', 'server_3']) {

>       alertInstanceFactory(server)

Reviewer: should be `services. alertInstanceFactory`

When an alert instance fires, the first argument is the `group` of actions to fire and the second is the context the alert exposes to templates. We iterate through each action params attributes recursively and render templates if they are a string. Templates have access to the `context` (provided by second argument of `.fire(...)` on an alert instance) and the alert instance's `state` (provided by the most recent `replaceState` call on an alert instance).

### Examples

The following code would be within an alert type. As you can see `cpuUsage ` will replace the state of the alert instance and `server` is the context for the alert instance to fire. The difference between the two is `cpuUsage ` will be accessible at the next execution.

```
alertInstanceFactory('server_1')
  .replaceState({
    cpuUsage: 80,
  })
  .fire('default', {
    server: 'server_1',
  });
```

Below is an example of an alert that takes advantage of templating:

```
{
  ...
  actions: [
    {

>       "group": "default",

Reviewer: so thinking about this more: group names are configured on alert instances, but the alert type code itself needs to know names for when it fires.  Don't see how this will work in practice unless we only have predefined names that you can use.

Author: Yes I think when we come up with throttling we'll make the alert type the source of truth for these groups and define a priority or something so we know when to stop throttling when alert status gets worse.

      "id": "3c5b2bd4-5424-4e4b-8cf5-c0a58c762cc5",
      "params": {
        "from": "example@elastic.co",

>         "to": "destination@elastic.co",

Reviewer: `to` should be an array to make it compatible with the example from the actions README.

  async execute({
    scheduledRunAt,
    previousScheduledRunAt,
    services,
    params,
    state,
  }: AlertExecuteOptions) {  
    // Use this example to fire a single action, server_1 is a unique identifier of the server
    // the instance is about. This will be used to make `getState()` return previous state on matching identifiers.
    services.alertInstanceFactory('server_1')
      .replaceState({
        // Alert instance level state, use getState() for
        // previous and persisted values
        ...
      })
      // 'default' refers to a group of actions to fire, see 'actions' in create alert section
      .fire('default', {
        server: 'server_1',
      });
    
    // Use this example to fire multiple actions
    // This scenario allows a single query and "fan-off" zero, one or many alerts based on the results
    for (const server of ['server_1', 'server_2', 'server_3']) {
      services.alertInstanceFactory(server)
      	 .replaceState({
      	 	// State specific to "server_x"
      	 	...
      	 })
      	 .fire('default', { server });
    }
    
    // Returning updated alert type level state
    return {
      ...
    };
  },
});
```

## Alerts

> Using an alert type requires an alert to be created which will contain parameters and actions for a given alert type.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Using an alert type requires you to create an alert that will contain parameters and actions for a given alert type.
```

### RESTful API

#### `POST /api/alert`: Create alert

Payload:

|Property|Description|Type|
|---|---|---|
|alertTypeId|The id value of the alert type you want to call when the alert is scheduled to execute.|string|
|interval|The interval in milliseconds the alert should execute.|number|
|alertTypeParams|The parameters to pass in to the alert type executor `params` value. This will also validate against the alert type params validator if defined.|object|
|actions|Array of the following:<br> - `group` (string): We support grouping actions in the scenario of escalations or different types of alert instances. If you don't need this, feel free to use `default` as a value.<br>- `id` (string): The id of the action saved object to fire.<br>- `params` (object): The map to the `params` the action type will receive. In order to help apply context to strings, we handle them as mustache templates and pass in a default set of context. (see templating actions).|array|

#### `DELETE /api/alert/{id}`: Delete alert

Params:

|Property|Description|Type|
|---|---|---|
|id|The id of the alert you're trying to delete.|string|

#### `GET /api/alert/_find`: Find alerts

Params:

> See saved objects API documentation for find, all the properties are the same except you cannot pass in `type`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
See the saved objects API documentation for find. All the properties are the same except you cannot pass in `type`.
```

Params:

|Property|Description|Type|
|---|---|---|
|id|The id of the alert you're trying to get.|string|

#### `GET /api/alert/types`: List alert types

No parameters.

#### `PUT /api/alert/{id}`: Update alert

Params:

|Property|Description|Type|
|---|---|---|
|id|The id of the alert you're trying to update.|string|

Payload:

|Property|Description|Type|
|---|---|---|
|interval|The interval in milliseconds the alert should execute.|number|
|alertTypeParams|The parameters to pass in to the alert type executor `params` value. This will also validate against the alert type params validator if defined.|object|
|actions|Array of the following:<br> - `group` (string): We support grouping actions in the scenario of escalations or different types of alert instances. If you don't need this, feel free to use `default` as a value.<br>- `id` (string): The id of the action saved object to fire.<br>- `params` (object): There map to the `params` the action type will receive. In order to help apply context to strings, we handle them as mustache templates and pass in a default set of context. (see templating actions).|array|

## Alert instance factory

**alertInstanceFactory(id)**

> One service passed in to alert types is an alert instance factory. This factory creates instances of alerts and must be used in order to fire actions. The id you give to the alert instance factory is a unique identifyer to the alert instance (ex: server identifier if the instance is about the server). The instance factory will use this identifier to retrieve state of previous instances with the same id. These instances support state persisting between alert type execution but will clear out once the alert instance stops firing.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
One service passed in to alert types is an alert instance factory. This factory creates instances of alerts and must be used in order to fire actions. The id you give to the alert instance factory is a unique identifier to the alert instance (ex: server identifier if the instance is about the server). The instance factory will use this identifier to retrieve the state of previous instances with the same id. These instances support state persisting between alert type execution, but will clear out once the alert instance stops firing.
```

### Examples

The following code would be within an alert type. As you can see `cpuUsage ` will replace the state of the alert instance and `server` is the context for the alert instance to fire. The difference between the two is `cpuUsage ` will be accessible at the next execution.

```
alertInstanceFactory('server_1')
  .replaceState({
    cpuUsage: 80,
  })
  .fire('default', {
    server: 'server_1',
  });
```

Below is an example of an alert that takes advantage of templating:

```
{
  ...
  actions: [
    {
      "group": "default",
      "id": "3c5b2bd4-5424-4e4b-8cf5-c0a58c762cc5",
      "params": {
        "from": "example@elastic.co",
        "to": ["destination@elastic.co"],
        "subject": "A notification about {{context.server}}"
        "body": "The server {{context.server}} has a CPU usage of {{state.cpuUsage}}%"
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

The templating system will take the alert and alert type as described above and convert the action parameters to the following:

```
{
  "from": "example@elastic.co",
  "to": ["destination@elastic.co"],
  "subject": "A notification about server_1"
  "body": "The server server_1 has a CPU usage of 80%"
}
```

> There are limitations that we are aware of using only templates, we are gathering feedback and use cases for these. (for example passing an array of strings to an action).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There are limitations that we are aware of using only templates, and we are gathering feedback and use cases for these. (for example passing an array of strings to an action).
```

The following table describes the properties of the `options` object.

|Property|Description|Type|
|---|---|---|
|id|Unique identifier for the alert type.|string|
|name|A user friendly name for the alert type.|string|
|validate.params|Joi object validation for the parameters the executor receives.|Joi schema|
|execute|A function to be called when executing an alert. See executor below.|Function|

### Executor

This is the primary function for an alert type, whenever the alert needs to execute, this function will perform the execution. It receives a variety of parameters, the following table describes the properties the executor receives.

**execute(options)**

|Property|Description|
|---|---|
|services.callCluster|Use this to do elasticsearch queries on the cluster Kibana connects to. NOTE: This currently authenticates as the Kibana internal user, this will change in a future PR.|
|services.savedObjectsClient|Use this to manipulate saved objects. NOTE: This currently only works when security is disabled. A future PR will add support for enabled security using Elasticsearch API tokens.|
|services.log|Use this to create server logs. (This is the same function as server.log)|

> |scheduledRunAt|The date and time the alert type was supposed to be called.|

Author: yeah I think that will come with the history / audit log phase where we could leverage that for meta functionality and such.

In regards to `meta` you're thinking wrapping those two into a `meta` object instead of being provided flat?

|previousScheduledRunAt|The previous date and time the alert type was supposed to be called.|
|params|Parameters for the execution.|
|state|State returned from previous execution.|

### Example

```
server.plugins.alerting.registerType({
  id: 'my-alert-type',
  name: 'My alert type',
  validate: {
    params: Joi.object()
      .keys({
        myParam: Joi.string().required(),
      })
      .required(),
  },
  async execute({
    scheduledRunAt,
    previousScheduledRunAt,
    services,
    params,
    state,
  }: AlertExecuteOptions) {
    // Pass in parameters, also validated
    const {
      myParam
    } = params;

    // Available services
    const {
      log,
      callCluster,
      savedObjectsClient,
      alertInstanceFactory,
    } = services;
  
    // Firing actions
    alertInstanceFactory('server_1')
      .replaceState({
        // Alert instance level state, use getState() for
        // previous and persisted values
        ...
      })
      .fire('default', {
        server: 'server_1',
      });
    
    // Returning updated alert type level state

>     return {

Author: I'm open for suggestions, this one here is the global state at the `alert` level regardless if an instance is created or not. We'll see if its used by the team.

      ...
    };
  },
});
```

## Alerts

Using an alert type requires an alert to be created which will contain parameters and actions for a given alert type.

The alerting plugin exposes the following APIs:

#### `POST /api/alert`: Create alert

Payload:

|Property|Description|Type|
|---|---|---|
|alertTypeId|The id value of the alert type you want to call when the alert is scheduled to execute.|string|

> |interval|The interval in milliseconds the alert should execute.|number|

Reviewer 2: thinking into the _near_ future, we'll want some `crontab` like thing here.  Here's how watcher does this: https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elastic-stack-overview/7.1/trigger-schedule.html 

I propose we eventually follow that, we can do just [`interval`](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elastic-stack-overview/7.1/trigger-schedule.html#schedule-interval) for now, unitless, and should probably be seconds and not millseconds.

That just means moving `interval` under a new top-level `schedule` attribute.  We can then roll out the other schedule types as needed.

|---|---|---|
|id|The id of the alert you're trying to get.|string|

#### `GET /api/alert/types`: List alert types

No parameters.

#### `PUT /api/alert/{id}`: Update alert

Params:

|Property|Description|Type|
|---|---|---|
|id|The id of the alert you're trying to update.|string|

Payload:

|Property|Description|Type|
|---|---|---|
|interval|The interval in milliseconds the alert should execute.|number|
|alertTypeParams|The parameters to pass in to the alert type executor `params` value.|object|
|action|An array of `group` (string), `id` (string) and params (object) to fire whenever the alert fires. The group allows the alert type fire fire different groups of actions. For example `warning` and `severe`. The id is the id of the action saved object to use. The params are the `params` value the action type expects. This uses mustache templates recursively on strings. The templates have access to `context` and `state` objects.|array|

## Alert instance factory

**alertInstanceFactory(id)**

One service passed in to alert types is an alert instance factory. This factory creates instances of alerts and lookups of previous instances with the same id to gather previous state.

> This returns an instance of `AlertInstance`. The alert instance class has the following methods, note that most of these are for internal use but they work as they are described:

Author: Yeah we're providing them different ways to do state management, we can review once they've developed their alerts and remove what is unused. We provide the ability to have persisted state between executions for each alert instance that fires (we'll use it internally for throttling soon). And if ever they want global state, that's where the `updated alert type level state` comes in.

> This returns an instance of `AlertInstance`. The alert instance class has the following methods, note that most of these are for internal use but they work as they are described:

Reviewer 2: I guess we'll figure it out as folks start using it, but seems unnecessarily complicated to me.  Or at least premature.  An alert type could of course store it's own global state all by itself if it wanted.  I guess if everyone ends up using such a thing, would be good to have support baked in.

|Method|Description|
|---|---|
|shouldFire()|Function returns `true` or `false` whether the alert instance should fire or not. This value turns to true when `.fire(...)` is called.|
|getFireOptions()|Function returns an object of `actionGroup`, `context` and `state` to use for firing the actions.|
|resetFire()|Reverts a `.fire(...)` call and makes the instance no longer fire.|

> |getState()|Get the current state of the alert instance.|

Author: Yeah I'll try to rethink this one, its hard to explain what it will contain since the developer is in control of that. But I can mark where the values will come from / be set from.

|getMeta()|Get the internal set meta attributes for the alert instance.|

> |fire(actionGroup, context)|Called to fire actions.|

Author: By design it can only be called once, we could enhance to throw an error if it does. In the scenario to do different actions, they would create different alert instances and fire each of them.

|replaceState(state)|Used to replace the current state of the alert instance.|
|replaceMeta(meta)|Function to replace internal meta attributes.|

## Templating actions

Each action within an alert contains its mapping of parameters to give an action type. To facilitate the mapping and to avoid having to make alert types aware of the actions, we added a templating system to allow converting content and state into parameters for an action type.

When an alert instance fires, the first argument is the `group` of actions to fire and the second is the context the alert exposes to templates. We iterate through each action attributes recursively and render templates if they are a string. Templates have access to the `context` and the alert instance's `state`.

### Examples

The following code would be within an alert type. As you can see `cpuUsage ` will replace the state of the alert instance and `server` is the context for the alert instance to fire. The difference between the two is `cpuUsage ` will be accessible at the next execution.

```
alertInstanceFactory('server_1')

>   .replaceState({

Reviewer 2: I'm really curious about this `.replaceState()` now!  How is related to the state that is returned by the alert executor, which is labelled `updated alert type level state` in an example above.  Perhaps this answers my question above re: having an explicit api to set state instead of via the return value.  But ... I'm thinking it's probably something different.  If different, I think we need a different name, or will need a simple "prefix" name for these "alert state" vss "alert type state" etc.

Author: Yeah this is different state than the `updated alert type level state`. One is global and one is specific to an alert instance. I'm open for new names. Just have to avoid confusion when you have two alerts for the same type, there's no cross state for that scenario.

    cpuUsage: 80,
  })
  .fire('default', {
    server: 'server_1',
  });
```

Below is an example of an alert that takes advantage of templating:

> ```

Reviewer 2: It would probably be good to have both a simple example like this one, as well as a more complicated one that shows how you might deal with multiple objects to "action".

Reviewer: ++

# Kibana alerting

The Kibana alerting plugin provides a common place to set up alerts. You can:

- Register types of alerts
- List the types of registered alerts
- Perform CRUD actions on alerts

## Terminology

**Alert Type**: A function that takes parameters and fires actions to alert instances.

**Alert**: A configuration that defines a schedule, an alert type w/ parameters, state information and actions.

**Alert Instance**: The instance(s) created from an alert type execution.

> 

Reviewer 4: A short explanation that builds a mental model might be helpful here, since alerts have quite a few moving pieces. 

I'll take a stab at it: 
```
A Kibana alert detects a condition and fires one or more actions when that condition occurs.  Alerts work by going through the followings steps:
1) Run a periodic check to detect a condition (the check is provided by an Alert Type) 
2) Convert that condition into one or more stateful Alert Instances
3) Map Alert Instances to pre-defined Actions, using templating
4) Execute the Actions
```

|interval|The interval in milliseconds the alert should execute.|number|
|alertTypeParams|The parameters to pass in to the alert type executor `params` value. This will also validate against the alert type params validator if defined.|object|
|actions|Array of the following:<br> - `group` (string): We support grouping actions in the scenario of escalations or different types of alert instances. If you don't need this, feel free to use `default` as a value.<br>- `id` (string): The id of the action saved object to fire.<br>- `params` (object): The map to the `params` the action type will receive. In order to help apply context to strings, we handle them as mustache templates and pass in a default set of context. (see templating actions).|array|

#### `DELETE /api/alert/{id}`: Delete alert

Params:

|Property|Description|Type|
|---|---|---|
|id|The id of the alert you're trying to delete.|string|

#### `GET /api/alert/_find`: Find alerts

Params:

See the saved objects API documentation for find. All the properties are the same except you cannot pass in `type`.

#### `GET /api/alert/{id}`: Get alert

Params:

|Property|Description|Type|
|---|---|---|

> |id|The id of the alert you're trying to get.|string|

Reviewer 4: Some information on what gets returned would be useful - I think we're just returning the alert configuration (i.e. what is in the saved object).  Some people might be expecting instance data like  alert state being returned here (say I want to get my alert and show its state in UI).  But sounds like we'd need to get that via the alertInstanceFactory since it is part of the instance.

Author: Yeah, I can see that. We can add new APIs or modify them as we build the alerting app to display valuable information. We may have to move things around or develop something new to make the data accessible.
